MonitoringOpenSourceNagios

= REMOVE ME = 

== Install == 
yum install nagios php mod-php
yum install pip-python
pip-python install Nagaconda

Get check_graphite from github or 
https://github.com/etsy/nagios_tools/blob/master/check_graphite_data

./check_graphite.py -u 'http://eqdg3twlp001/render/?target=servers.travel-ecommerce-1.CreditCardService.ActiveInvocationCount&rawData=true'


cp check_graphite.py /usr/bin
chmod 755 /usr/bin


Define new command on nagios 

define command{
        command_name    check_graphite
        command_line    check_graphite.py -u $ARG1$ -w $ARG2$ -c $ARG3$
        }

		
		Add a service for checking some metric
		

define service{
        use                             local-service         ; Name of service template to use
        host_name                       localhost
        service_description             test graphite
        check_command                   check_graphite!http://eqdg3twlp001/render/?target=servers.travel-ecommerce-1.CreditCardService.ActiveInvocationCount&rawData=true!-1!-2
        }

		
== END OF INSTALL ==
 
= END REMOVE ME =


= Nagios = 

== What Is This? ==

Nagios is a system and network monitoring application. 
It watches hosts and services that you specify, alerting you when things go bad and when they get better. 

You can easily define new plugin. We add a new command for queries stored metrics in graphite and define thresold for alert.

== Tips ==

=== Start and stop ===

Manage nagios deamon
/etc/init.d/nagios [start|stop]

Manage nagios web application
/etc/init.d/httpd [start|stop]

=== Configuration file ===



==== Adding a new command definition ====

In command.cfg add 

define command{
    command_name    my_check_command
    command_line    my_check_command.py -u $ARG1$ -w $ARG2$ -c $ARG3$
}

You can use a lot of variable like ARG or HOSTNAME. 

==== Adding a host ====

Add a new host definition in a config file. For this workshop add host in /etc/nagios/travel/
We use linux-server template defined in /etc/nagios/objects/template.cfg

{{{
define host{
        use                     linux-server            ; Name of host template to use
                                                        ; This host definition will inherit all variables that are defined
                                                        ; in (or inherited by) the linux-server host template definition.
        host_name               antifraud-prod.travel.xebia-tech-event.info
        alias                   antifraud-prod
        address                 46.137.98.234
}
}}}

==== Adding a new service monitoring on a host ====

Add a new service definition in config file. 

Some remote service defined in /etc/nagios/objets/remotehost.cfg

{{{
define service{
        host_name                 prod1.travel.xebia-tech-event.info
        use                            check_remote_disk
}
}}}


==== Getting raw data from graphite ====

You can use rawData=true for query timeseries

{{{
http://server/render?target=monitored-indicator&from=-1minutes&rawData=true
}}}

== Lab ==

Graphite plugin is installed in your nagios installation

* See graphite command definition in /etc/nagios/objects/command.cfg
* Add host for all server of xebia spring travel
* Define alert on metrics stored in graphite

|| Metric || Warning || Critical ||
|| On each server GC usage > N% || 10 || 25 ||
|| Exception on credit card service (req/min) || 10 || 50 ||
|| Average !CreditCardService response time in last n minutes > (ms) || 1000 || 5000 ||